IPL 2024: Complete List of New Rules and Playing Conditions
IPL 2024: The BCCI and the ICC have introduced new rules to the Indian Premier League this year. In this article, we will take a look at all of those new rules introduced. 

The 17th edition of the Indian Premier League, IPL 2024, will kick off on March 22 with an exciting match between five-time title winners Chennai Super Kings (CSK) and the Royal Challengers Bengaluru (RCB). Like the previous year, this year will also have 10 teams competing for the title in a round-robin format. 

The Board of Cricket Council of India (BCCI) and the International Cricket Council (ICC) have introduced new rules to the cricket league this year as well. In 2023, the impact player rule and the DRS method were some of the new rules introduced to the league. 

Let’s take a look at the new rules and formats introduced for the 2024 IPL.

IPL 2024: Format and Venues
Over the last three years, the IPL has been conducted across a reduced number of venues. 
The 2022 edition was hosted in Mumbai and Pune, the 2021 edition started in select locations in India before moving to the UAE, and the 2020 IPL was entirely conducted in the UAE, because of the COVID outbreak.  The 2022 edition of the league took place across six different venues. Each team played 14 league matches. There were a total of 74 matches in the 2022 IPL season. 
The IPL 2024 will be held across 11 different venues in different Indian cities. 
In the IPL, each team that wins a match is awarded 2 points in the IPL Points Table. The losing team receives no points. If two teams or more have the same points, then the ranking is determined by the Net Run Rate (NRR) of each team. 
After the group stage, a four-game playoff stage is conducted, The playoffs comprise four matches:
Qualifier 1: Played between the top two ranked teams from the group stage.

Eliminator: Played between the third and fourth-ranked teams from the group stage.

Qualifier 2: Played between the team that loses in Qualifier 1 and the winner of the Eliminator.

Final: Played between the winners of Qualifiers 1 and 2.

IPL 2024: New Two Bouncers Rule
A new bowling rule has been announced for the IPL 2024. Let's understand what it is:

In the 17th edition of the IPL, bowlers can now bowl up to two bouncers (fast short-pitched deliveries) per over. In previous seasons, only one bouncer was permitted per over. 
A bouncer is defined as a ball that passes above the batter's shoulder height at the popping crease.
Any delivery exceeding the shoulder height limit will be called a wide. Deliveries exceeding head height and preventing a normal stroke will also be called a wide.
The first wide resulting from a bouncer exceeding the limit will still count as one of the two allowable bouncers per over. If a bowler exceeds the limit of two bouncers in an over (not counting wides), it will be called a no-ball. Further violations after the first no-ball will lead to the bowler's suspension from bowling for the remainder of the innings.

The Impact Player Rule
The Impact Player Rule was added in the IPL 2023. Though this rule is nothing new in the cricket world, it is the first time it was introduced into the IPL. 
The impact player rule allows each team to name up to five substitution players in addition to their playing XI after the toss. During the game, one of these players called the Impact Player, can replace a member of the playing XI if it benefits the team's performance in the match. 
The rule permits teams to make substitutions during the game to improve the match's circumstances and playing conditions. 
Furthermore, the it  enables teams to choose their playing XI after the toss, which eliminates the toss's influence on the team's selection.

New DRS Method
Players have the option to challenge the umpire's wide and no-ball decisions through the use of the Decision Review System (DRS). The introduction of this rule in the men’s league follows its successful implementation in the Women's Premier League (WPL) in 2023. 

No Player Sheet at Toss 
There has been a change in the protocol for team sheets in IPL matches, as captains are no longer required to hand over team sheets at the toss. Instead, teams have the option to negate the impact of the toss by selecting their XI players and five substitutes based on the outcome of the toss. 
Furthermore, one of these five substitutes can be designated as the impact sub during the game. This new rule enables teams to strategize better and have more flexibility with their team composition during the game.
Despite the new rules and additions to the game, the IPL 2024 is going to be one of the most thrilling sports events of the year. It will be spectacular to watch the top cricketers from around the world compete against each other to win the title. 

No Player Sheet at Toss 
There has been a change in the protocol for team sheets in IPL matches, as captains are no longer required to hand over team sheets at the toss. Instead, teams have the option to negate the impact of the toss by selecting their XI players and five substitutes based on the outcome of the toss. 
Furthermore, one of these five substitutes can be designated as the impact sub during the game. This new rule enables teams to strategize better and have more flexibility with their team composition during the game.
Despite the new rules and additions to the game, the IPL 2024 is going to be one of the most thrilling sports events of the year. It will be spectacular to watch the top cricketers from around the world compete against each other to win the title. 